# ($\epsilon$,$\delta$)-Differential Privacy

## In brief

A relaxed version of {doc}`L2.differential_privacy`, named **($\epsilon$,$\delta$)-Differential Privacy**,
allows a little privacy loss ($\delta$) due to a variation in the output distribution for the privacy mechanism.


## More in Detail

### Relaxing $\epsilon$-Differential Privacy
The ($\epsilon$,$\delta$)-differential privacy model is a common
relaxation of $\epsilon$-differential privacy. Under the
$\epsilon$-differential privacy model, the probabilities that the
function $\mathtt{f}$ outputs the same output when computed over
neighboring datasets are allowed to diverge up to an $e^\epsilon$
factor. The ($\epsilon$,$\delta$)-differential privacy model
additionally tolerates the two probabilities to diverge by a small
additional quantity, denoted $\delta$.  <!-- TODO : discuss why it is
useful (utility). -->

This leads to revisiting the formal definition of
$\epsilon$-differential privacy as follows. A *random function*
$\mathtt{f}$ with range $\mathcal{O}$ satisfies ($\epsilon$,
$\delta$)-differential privacy if and only if for all possible pairs
of datasets ($\mathcal{D}$, $\mathcal{D}'$) such that $\mathcal{D}'$
is $\mathcal{D}$ with one record more or one record less, and for all
$\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{O}$, then it holds that: $\mathtt{Pr}
[ \mathtt{f} ( \mathcal{D} ) \in \mathcal{S} ] \leq
e^\mathbf{\epsilon} \times \mathtt{Pr} [ \mathtt{f} ( \mathcal{D}' )
\in \mathcal{S} ] + \delta$ where $\epsilon>0$ and $\delta \geq 0$ are
the privacy parameters. When $\delta>0$,
($\epsilon$,$\delta$)-differential privacy is also called *approximate
differential privacy*.



## Bibliography
The ($\epsilon$,$\delta$)-differential privacy model is introduced in
{cite:p}`Dwork2006OurDO` and thoroughly studied in
{cite:p}`Meiser2018ApproximateAP`.

```{bibliography}
:style: unsrt
:filter: docname in docnames
```

> This entry was written by Tristan Allard.
