#Structure For T3.4
#====================
#L1. Accountability and Reproducibility
#L2. Accountability (Luciano TU Delft, Francesca CNR)
#L3. Meaningful human control (Arkady, Luciano TU Delft)
#L3. Frame problem
#L3. Accountability gaps
#L3. Wicked problems
#L3. Impact assessment tools
#L2. Reproducibility (Reproducibility, Replicability, Repeatability)
#L3. Guidelines for reproducibility
#L3. Software frameworks supporting reproducibility
#L2. Traceability
#L3. Provenance tracking (PUT, Riccardo CNR, Agnieszka)
#L3. Continuous performance monitoring (Sara, CNR)
#The Frame problem

**Definition**
Accountability and reprodubicility are two interrelated concepts, cornerstones of Trustworthy AI. Accoutable AI systems can contribute to reproducibility, and Reproducible AI systems can contribute to accountability.

Accountability and Reproducibility are two cornerstones of Trustworthy AI \cite{ai2019high}. Accountability requires mechanisms be put in place to ensure that AI systems and their outcomes, both before and after their development, deployment and use, can be observed and analyzed. This ability to review AI systems involve technical and organisational logging processes \cite{cobbe2021reviewable} to enable investigators to draw the same conclusions from an experiment by following provided guidelines.

In this context, accountability and reproducibility are interrelated concepts. Developing reprodubicle AI systems can enable accountability over AI systems. On the other hand, the process of record-tracking and logging for accountability can support an increasing level of reproducibility.

---
**Authors**:
- Luciano C Siebert - Faculty of Electrical Engineering Mathematics and Computer Science, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
---

## Bibliography

```{bibliography}
:style: unsrt
:filter: docname in docnames
```
