# Provenance Tracking

## In brief

**Provenance Tracking** represents the tracking of  "information that describes the production process of an end product, which can be anything from a piece of data to a physical object. [...] Essentially, provenance can be seen as meta-data that, instead of describing data, describes a production process." {cite}`Herschel2017` 

## More in Detail

“Traceability in AI shares part of its scope with general-purpose recommendations for provenance ... ”{cite}`mora-cantallops_traceability_2021`. In fact, provenance is “any information that describes the production process of an end product, which can be anything from a piece of data to a physical object”
{cite}`Herschel2017`.

Keeping track of provenance is vital in various settings. It contributes
to increasing the trust on produced systems. According to Gil et al.
{cite}`DBLP:journals/computer/GilDEFFGGLMM07`, the provenance of scientific results, i.e., "how results were derived, what parameters influenced the
derivation, what datasets were used as input to the experiment, etc."
facilitates the reproducibility of the whole process.

Data and workflows deployed in an AI system are two key ingredients in
traceability and provenance tracking. In particular, the distinction
between *prospective* and *retrospective* provenance is introduced in
the literature when dealing with workflows. The prospective provenance
models workflows in an abstract and informative way, as templates
composed of tasks that can be instantiated, modified, and combined. The
retrospective provenance models past workflows, highlighting what task
was executed and how data or other artifacts were derived
{cite}`conf/IEEEscc/LimLCF10`.
Herschel et al. {cite}`Herschel2017` claims that "provenance can be seen as metadata that,
instead of describing data, describes a production process". Considering the central role metadata play
in tracking provenance, this section discusses some popular models to
track provenance. In particular, Garijo et al.  {cite}`DBLP:journals/fgcs/GarijoGC17` have
provided a holistic, Linked Data compliant, and ready-to-use solution to
document workflow specifications and their executions, which exploits PROV-O
{cite}`PROV-O`, P-PLAN {cite}`upm19478` and the Open Provenance Model for
Workflows (OPMW)[^1].

PROV is a metadata model defined as a W3C recommendation. It captures
the provenance documenting the entities, agents, actions, and the
involved in a production chain, and the relations among them (e.g.,
attribution and usage). PROV acknowledges the need to represent
workflows, also called plans, by including a construct such as
*prov:Plan*. However, "it does not elaborate any
further on how plans can be described or related to other provenance elements
of the execution." {cite}`upm19478`.

P-PLAN vocabulary extends PROV-O introducing constructs for plans
(*p-plan:Plan* subclass of *prov:Plan*), their steps (*p-plan:Step*) and
their input and output variables (*p-plan:Variable*). Still, P-PLAN does
not model a full-fledged notion of workflow.

OPMW extends P-PLAN and the "Open Provenance Model (OPM), a legacy
provenance model developed by the workflow community that was used as a
reference to create PROV" {cite}`DBLP:journals/fgcs/GarijoGC17`. OPMW
distinguishes between workflow specifications, namely *templates*, and
their workflow execution traces.

OPMW specifies workflow *templates* as instances of the class
*opmw:WorkflowTemplate* (subclass of *p-plan:Plan*); the template
processes/actions as *opmw:WorkflowTemplateProcess* (subclass of
*p-plan:Step*); the template artifacts, manipulated or produced by
processes, as *opmw:WorkflowTemplateArtifact* (subclass of
*p-plan:Variable*). Accordingly, the template for the generic n-th step
is an instance of *opmw:WorkflowTemplateProcess*. The n-th template
steps' input and output are indicated by the properties
*p-plan:hasInputVar* and *p-plan:isOutputVarOf*, and are instances of
*opmw:WorkflowTemplateArtifact*, representing any expected file,
parameter, and collection of documents considered and manipulated by the
template step. The classes *opmw:WorkflowExecutionAccount*,
*opmw:WorkflowExecutionProcess* and *opmw:WorkflowExecutionTemplate*
represent the execution counterparts of the template instances. The
properties *opmw:correspondsToTemplate*,
*opmw:correspondsToTemplateProcess*,
*opmw:correspondsToTemplateArtifact* bind the execution and the template
counterparts. Thus, n-th step is the actual execution of the n-th
template step and it is an instance of *opmw:WorkflowExecutionProcess*,
which is a specialization of the class *prov:Activity*. The actual
execution's n-th input and output steps are indicated by the PROV
properties *prov:used* and *prov:wasGeneratedby*, and are instances of
*opmw:workflowExecutionArtifact* which is a particular kind of
*prov:Entity*. Albertoni et al. {cite}`DBLP:journals/tetc/AlbertoniMQ21` provides examples of
the use of the above metadata models when documenting scientific
experiments.

Although not specific to AI experiments and systems, the models
mentioned above offer some excellent standing and a backbone for
describing data, actors, other kinds of entities, and how these might
relate in experiments. Such a standing needs to be refined and extended
to capture the gist of specific AI experiments. AI-related controlled
terminologies might be required, for example, to complements the
backbones with the hyper-parameters, tasks and metrics for AI
techniques. Adopting a backbone, which is defined according to linked
data best practices, offers the ability to combine different models and
terminologies as needed, easing the tailoring of such backbone with the
required AI-specific and community-governed refinements.


## Bibliography

```{bibliography}
:style: unsrt
:filter: docname in docnames
```
---

This entry was written by Riccardo Albertoni.

---

[^1]: <http://www.opmw.org/model/OPMW/>

