# Software frameworks supporting reproducibility 


> Authors:
> - Riccardo Albertoni - Istituto di Matematica Applicata e Tecnologie Informatiche "Enrico Magenes", Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (IMATI-CNR), Via De Marini, 6, 16149 Genova, Italy
> - Sara Colantonio - Institute of Information Science and Technologies "A. Faedo" of the National Research Council of Italy (ISTI-CNR), Via G. Moruzzi, 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy
> - Piotr Skrzypczyński - Institute of Robotics and Machine Intelligence,
> Poznań University of Technology, ul. Piotrowo 3A, 60-965 Poznań, Poland
> - Jerzy Stefanowski - Institute of Computing Science, Poznań University of Technology, ul. Piotrowo 2, 60-965 Poznań, Poland


Lately, a paradigm based on tailoring the DevOps approach to AI and ML
is emerging as a practical tool for ensuring reproducibility. This
paradigm makes use of frameworks for Machine Learning Model
Operationalization Management (MLOps), which streamline the whole
development lifecycle of AI and ML models. MLOps enables developers and
auditors to keep track of and inspect the various choices done and the
artefacts produced in the different phases of AI and ML design and
development (i.e., data gathering, data analysis, data
transformation/preparation, model training and development, model
validation, and model serving). {cite}`Ruf_2021` analyze some of the
available open tools for MLOps. This allows for maintaining a
comprehensive documentation that is at the basis of model
reproducibility.

## Bibliography

```{bibliography}
:style: unsrt
:filter: docname in docnames
```
