# Segregation

## In brief

## More in Detail

*Social segregation* refers to the "*separation of socially defined
groups*" {cite}`massey2016segregation`. People are partitioned into two or
more groups on the grounds of personal or cultural traits that can
foster discrimination, such as gender, age, ethnicity, income, skin
color, language, religion, political opinion, membership of a national
minority, etc. (see entry on {doc}`discrimination`). Contact, communication, or interaction
among groups are limited by their physical, working or socio-economic
distance. Such a separation is observed when dissecting the society into
organizational units (neighborhoods, schools, job types).
 


```{figure} ./segregationmap.png
---
name: segregationmap
width: 700px
align: center
---
Racial spatial segregation in New York City, based on Census 2000 data
{cite}`efischer`. One dot for each 500 residents. Red dots are Whites, blue
dots are Blacks, green dots are Asian, orange dots are Hispanic, and
yellow dots are other races.
```

Early studies on residential segregation trace back to 1930's
{cite}`denton1988residential`. In this context, social groups are set apart
in neighborhoods where they live in, in schools they attend to, or in
companies they work at. As sharply pointed out in
Fig. {numref}`{number} <segregationmap>`, racial segregation (a.k.a. residential
segregation on the grounds of race) very often emerges in cities
characterized by ethnic diversity. Schelling's segregation model
{cite}`Schelling1971,Clark1991` shows that there is a natural tendency to
spatial segregation, as a collective phenomenon, even if each individual
is relatively tolerant -- in his famous abstract simulation model, Nobel
laureate Schelling assumed that a person changes residence only if less
than 30% of the neighbors are of his/her own race.

{cite}`Massey2009` argued that segregation is shifting from ancient forms on
the grounds of racial, ethnic and gender traits to modern socio-economic
and cultural segregation on the basis of income, job position, and
political-religious opinions. An earlier comparison of ideological
segregation of the American electorate online and offline is offered in
{cite}`gentzkow2010ideological`. The paper found that segregation in news
consumption is higher online than offline, but significantly lower than
the segregation of face-to-face interactions with neighbors, co-workers,
or family members. More recently, it has been warned that the filter
bubble generated by personalization of online social networks may foster
segregation {cite}`flaxman2013ideological`, opinion
polarization {cite}`maes2015will`, and lack of consensus between different
social groups. Segregation in social network has been investigated in
{cite}`DBLP:journals/jiis/BaroniR18`, with experiments on segregation on the
grounds of sex and age for directors in the boards of the companies.
Other works have focused on religious social networks
{cite}`DBLP:journals/epjds/HuZZ19`,

A segregation index provides a quantitative measure of the degree of
segregation of social groups (e.g., Blacks, Whites, Hispanics, etc.)
distributed among units of social organization (e.g., schools,
neighborhoods, jobs, etc.). Several indexes have been proposed in the
literature. The surveys {cite}`duncan1955methodological,JamesTauber85`
represent the earliest attempts to categorize them. Afterward,
{cite}`massey1988dimensions` provided a shared classification with reference
to five key dimensions: evenness, exposure, concentration,
centralization, and clustering. Finally,
{cite}`DBLP:journals/socnet/BojanowskiC14` adapts segregation measure to
graphs representing social networks. In this entry, we will consider
basic evenness and exposure indexes. Other three classes of indexes are
specifically concerned with spatial notions of segregation.
Concentration indexes measure the relative amount of physical space
occupied by social groups in an urban area. Centralization indexes
measure the degree to which a group is spatially located near the center
of an urban area. Clustering indexes measure the degree to which group
members live disproportionately in contiguous areas.

We restrict here to consider binary indexes, which assume a partitioning
of the population into two groups, say majority and minority (but could
be men/women, native/immigrant, White/NonWhite, etc.). Let $T$ be size
of the total population, $0 < M < T$ be the size of the minority group,
and $P = M/T$ be the overall fraction of the minority group. Assume that
there are $n$ organizational units (or simply, units), and that for
$i \in [1, n]$, $t_i$ is the size of the population in unit $i$, $m_i$
is the size of the minority group in unit $i$, and $p_i = m_i/t_i$ is
the fraction of the minority population in unit $i$.

*Evenness indexes.* Evenness indexes measure the difference in the
distributions of social groups among organizational units. The
*dissimilarity index* $D$ is the weighted mean absolute deviation of
every unit's minority proportion from the global minority proportion: <br>
$D = \frac{1}{2 \cdot P \cdot (1-P)} \sum_{i=1}^n \frac{t_i}{T}
\cdot | p_i - P | \label{equ:dissimilarity}$ <br> 
The normalization factor
$2 \cdot P \cdot (1-P)$ is to obtain an index in the range $[0, 1]$.
Since $D$ measures dispersion of minorities over the units, higher
values of the index mean higher segregation. Dissimilarity is minimum
when for all $i \in [1, n]$, $p_i = P$, namely the distribution of the
minority group is uniform over units. It is maximum when for all
$i \in [1, n]$, either $p_i = 1$ or $p_i = 0$, namely every unit
includes members of only one group (complete segregation).

The second widely adopted index is the *information index*, also known
as the *Theil index* in social sciences {cite}`Mora2011` and normalized
mutual information in machine learning {cite}`mitchell1997`. Let the
population entropy be $E = -
P \cdot \log{P}-(1-P) \cdot \log{(1-P)}$, and the entropy of unit $i$ be
$E_i = - p_i \cdot \log{p_i}-(1-p_i) \cdot \log{(1-p_i)}$. The
information index is the weighted mean fractional deviation of every
unit's entropy from the population entropy: <br>
$H = \sum_{i=1}^n \frac{t_i}{T} \cdot \frac{(E-E_i)}{E}$ <br	>
Information index ranges in $[0, 1]$. Since it denotes a relative reduction in
uncertainty in the distribution of groups after considering units,
higher values mean higher segregation of groups over the units.
Information index reaches the minimum when all the units respect the
global entropy (full integration), and the maximum when every unit
contains only one group (complete segregation).

The third evenness measure is the *Gini index*, defined as the mean
absolute difference between minority proportions weighted across all
pairs of units, and normalized to the maximum weighted mean difference.
In formula: <br>
$\label{eq:Gini}
G = \frac{1}{2 \cdot T^2 \cdot P \cdot (1-P)} \cdot \sum_{i=1}^n
\sum_{j=1}^n t_i \cdot t_j \cdot |p_i - p_j|$ <br>
Here
$\sum_{i=1}^n \sum_{j=1}^n t_i \cdot t_j \cdot |p_i - p_j|$ is the
weighted mean absolute difference. The normalization factor is obtained
by maximizing such a value. The definition of the Gini index stems from
econometrics, where it is used as a measure of the inequality of income
distribution {cite}`gastwirth1971general`. The Gini index ranges in $[0, 1]$
with higher values denoting higher segregation. The maximum and minimum
values are reached in the same cases of the dissimilarity index.

*Exposure indexes.* Exposure indexes measure the degree of potential
contact, or possibility of interaction, between members of social
groups. The most used measure of exposure is the *isolation index*
{cite}`bell1954probability`, defined as the likelihood that a member of the
minority group is exposed to another member of the same group in a unit.
For a unit $i$, this can be estimated as the product of the likelihood
that a member of the minority group is in the unit ($m_i/M$) by the
likelihood that she is exposed to another minority member in the unit
($m_i/t_i$, or $p_i$) -- assuming that the two events are independent.
In formula: <br>
$I = \frac{1}{M} \cdot \sum_{i=1}^n m_i \cdot p_i$

The right hand-side formula can be read as the minority-weighted average
of minority proportions in units. The isolation index ranges over
$[P, 1]$, with higher values denoting higher segregation. The minimum
value is reached when for $i \in [1, n]$, $p_i = P$, namely the
distribution of the minority group is uniform over the units. The
maximum value is reached when there is only one $k \in [1, n]$ such that
$m_k = t_k = M$, namely there is a unit containing all minority members
and no majority member.

A dual measure is the *interaction index*, which is the likelihood that
a member of the minority group is exposed to a member of the majority
group in a unit. By reasoning as above, this leads to the formula: <br>
$\mathit{Int} = \frac{1}{M} \cdot \sum_{i=1}^n m_i \cdot (1-p_i)$ <br>
It clearly holds that $I + \mathit{Int} = 1$. Hence, lower values denote
higher segregation. A more general definition of interaction index
occurs when more than two groups are considered in the analysis, so that
the exposure of the minority group to one of the other groups is worth
to be considered {cite}`massey1988dimensions`.

The key problem of assessing social segregation has been investigated by
hypothesis testing, i.e., by formulating one or more possible contexts
of segregation against a certain social group, and then in empirically
testing such hypotheses. Such an approach is currently supported by
statistical tools, such as the R packages *OasisR*[^oasis] and *seg*[^seg]
{cite}`seg2014`, or by GIS tools such as the *Geo-Segregation Analyzer*[^geo-seg]
{cite}`geosa2014`. A tool for multidimensional exploration of segregation
index has been proposed[^multi-seg] in {cite}`DBLP:conf/edbt/0001R19`.

## Bibliography

```{bibliography}
:style: unsrt
:filter: docname in docnames
```

---

This entry was readapted from *Alessandro Baroni and Salvatore Ruggieri. Segregation discovery in a social network of companies. J. Intell. Inf. Syst., 51(1):71–96, 2018* by Salvatore Ruggieri

---

[^oasis]: [cran.r-project.org/package=OasisR](https://cran.r-project.org/package=OasisR)

[^seg]: [cran.r-project.org/package=seg](https://cran.r-project.org/package=seg)

[^geo-seg]: [geoseganalyzer.ucs.inrs.ca](http://geoseganalyzer.ucs.inrs.ca)

[^multi-seg]: [github.com/ruggieris/SCube](https://github.com/ruggieris/SCube)

