# Achieving Differential Privacy

<!--# Perturbation Mechanisms-->

## In Brief

Differential privacy guarantees can be provided by perturbation mechanisms aim at randomizing the output distributions of functions in order to provide privacy guarantees.

## More in Detail

Perturbation mechanisms aim at randomizing the output distributions of
functions in order to provide privacy guarantees. We focus on the
major mechanisms able to provide differential privacy guarantees (see
{doc}`./L2.differential_privacy`) and concentrate on the major
mechanisms. *The Laplace Mechanism* <!--{doc}`./L3.laplace`--> 
is dedicated to perturb functions
that output real values, allowing them to satisfy
[$\epsilon$-Differential Privacy](./L3.epsilon_DP). The [Exponential
Mechanism](./L3.exponential) is a generalization of the Laplace
mechanism and also allows to satisfy [$\epsilon$-differential
privacy](./L3.epsilon_DP). The éGaussian Mechanism* <!--[Gaussian mechanism](./L3.gaussian) -->
is a variant of the Laplace mechanism, applying to functions that output
real values as well, but allowing them to satisfy the [$(\epsilon,\delta)$-differential privacy](./L3.epsilon_delta_DP)
relaxation. These three mechanisms are appropriate for perturbing
centralized functions that input a full dataset (e.g., a sum
query). They are often used as basic building blocks, combined or not,
for perturbing elaborate functions. Finally, [Randomized Response
Mechanisms](./L3.local_perturbation) input and output one single row
at a time (represented as a vector of bits): they are local mechanisms
and can be applied prior to the data collection.

### History
The earliest known randomized response mechanism has been proposed in
the 1960's (decades before differential privacy) by Warner, a
sociologist who wanted to improve the reliability of responses to
sensitive questions by letting the interviewee perturb his/her answer
in a controlled manner. Thanks to the simplicity of their
implementation and to the differential privacy guarantees that they
provide, they generate a renewed interest both from the academia and
from the industry.  
<!-- (see, e.g.,
https://www.chromium.org/developers/design-documents/rappor/)--> 

The Laplace mechanism (resp. the Gaussian mechanism) has been proposed jointly with the seminal [$\epsilon$-differential privacy](./L3.epsilon_DP) model (resp. the [$(\epsilon, \delta)$-differential privacy](./L3.epsilon_delta_DP) model). Its generalization as the Exponential mechanism was proposed the following year.


## Bibliography
The early randomized response mechanism was proposed in
{cite:p}`Warner1965RandomizedRA`, the Laplace mechanism in
{cite:p}`Dwork2006CalibratingNT` and the Exponential mechanism in
{cite:p}`McSherry2007MechanismDV`. The Gaussian mechanism was shown to
satisfy $(\epsilon, \delta)$-differential privacy in
{cite:p}`Dwork2006OurDO`. Finally,
{cite:p}`DBLP:journals/pvldb/CormodeMM21` provides an overview and an
evaluation of various randomized response mechanisms proposed before
2021.

```{bibliography}
:style: unsrt
:filter: docname in docnames
```

---
 
This entry was written by Tristan Allard.
