# Accountability and Reproducibility

## In brief

{doc}`./L2.Accountability` and {doc}`./L2.Reproducibility` are two interrelated concepts, cornerstones of Trustworthy AI. Accoutable AI systems can contribute to reproducibility, and Reproducible AI systems can contribute to accountability.

## More in detail

{doc}`./L2.Accountability` and {doc}`./L2.Reproducibility` are two cornerstones of Trustworthy AI {cite}`HLEG_Trust`. Accountability requires mechanisms be put in place to ensure that AI systems and their outcomes, both before and after their development, deployment and use, can be observed and analyzed. This ability to review AI systems involve technical and organisational logging processes {cite}`cobbe2021reviewable` to enable investigators to draw the same conclusions from an experiment by following provided guidelines.

In this context, {doc}`./L2.Accountability` and {doc}`./L2.Reproducibility` are interrelated concepts. Developing reprodubicle AI systems can enable accountability over AI systems. On the other hand, the process of record-tracking and logging for accountability can support an increasing level of reproducibility.

A third dimension strictly correlated with {doc}`./L2.Accountability` and {doc}`./L2.Reproducibility` is {doc}`./L2.Traceability`. We suggest to navigate in the appropriate section of this book for more detailed information about these three dimensions.



## Bibliography

```{bibliography}
:style: unsrt
:filter: docname in docnames
```

---

This entry was written by Luciano C Siebert.

