# Reproducibility

*Synonyms:* Replicability

## In brief
_Reproducibility is the ability of independent investigators to draw the same conclusions from an experiment by following the documentation shared by the original investigators._ {cite}`Gundersen_2021`

## Abstract

This entry firstly introduces the motivations behind reproducibility in
the scientific process and, then, in artificial intelligence and machine
learning. Due to the rather wide range of different meanings of
reproducibility in the literature and the ambiguity of the terms, a
brief review of the most important definitions is provided and
discussed. In this context, we promote the most stable formulation of
the definition. Practical guidelines to various standards for
documenting code, technical experiment setup, and data are also
discussed.

## Motivation and Background

Reproducibility in science means that one can repeat or replicate the
same (or sufficiently similar) experiment and obtain the same (or
sufficiently similar) research results as the original scientists on the
basis of their publications and descriptions. To this aim and to ease
the replication, the discovered claims, methods and analyses should be
described in a sufficiently detailed and transparent way. Diverse
reproducibility settings have been identified in the literature, see
e.g. {cite}`Gundersen_2021` {cite}`plesser_reproducibility_2018`, but from a more general standpoint, reproducibility entails that studies are reproduced
by independent researchers.

Reproducibility is an essential ingredient of the scientific method,
meant to verify the published results and claims and to enable a
continuous self-correcting process in scientific discoveries.
Unfortunately, the rising of a so-called research replication crisis has
been lately pointed out ({cite}`Baker2016`). According to several surveys, a
relatively too large amount of published research results, in such
disciplines as chemistry, biology, medicine and pharmacy, earth and
environmental sciences, cannot be repeated. This may suggest issues with
these results or at least with their good descriptions. Reproducibility
in artificial intelligence (AI) and, in particular machine learning
(ML), are specifically challenging. The continuously increasing
complexity of new methods (often having many hyper-parameters that need
specialized optimization strategies), the size of studied datasets and
the use of advanced computational resources pose many difficulties for
communicating the necessary results as compared to the older works. The
paper {cite}`Heaven2020` presents the view of some researchers (such as J.
Pineau citing her interview) claiming that ML was previously more
theoretically based, while it has become a more experimental science in
the past decade, and many proposals of new models, in particular deep
networks, come from running many experiments with the intensive use of
available data. In this context, the authors ({cite}`pineau_et_al_2020`)
indicate growing difficulties in reproducing the work of others. Other
reasons of difficulty in reproducibility include: lack of access to the
same training data or differences in data distribution;
mis-specification or under-specification of the model or training
procedure; lack of availability of the code necessary to run the
experiments, or errors in the code; under-specification of the metrics
used to report results; selective reporting of results and ignorance of
the danger of adaptive overfitting as well as the use of adaptation
strategies embedded in the development libraries.

Nevertheless, software solutions and systems based on AI and ML are
gaining momentum. Many of them are being used in high-stake applications
where their decisions can have an impact on people and society, and
their improper operation may cause harm. In this frame, the quest for
reproducibility of such methods is even more urgent and reproducibility
becomes one of the key postulates within Responsible AI or Trustworthy
AI. {cite}`raff2019step` also claims that reproducibility of AI is very
important for other reasons. Researchers, students and R&D engineers
need to have a good understanding of new and, often quite complex,
methods, reproduce them (sometimes by their own re-implementations),
carefully check their correctness, examine their working conditions and
limitations, as well as to verify the presented results, especially if
they need to further use them in their systems often applied to complex
tasks. Moreover much of AI new projects receive either public or
business funds, so it should be subject to accountability and it is
necessary to convince others that these projects can produce reliable
results.

## Terminology 

In this handbook, we follow the concept of reproducibility introduced by
{cite}`Claerbout1992`. According to this concept, which is also adopted in a
number of more recent papers
(e.g.,{cite}`Gundersen_2021`; {cite}`Lynnerup_et_al_2020`; {cite}`pineau_et_al_2020`),
*reproducibility* refers to the ability of an independent researcher to
reproduce the same, or reasonably similar results using the data and the
experimental setup provided by the original authors.

Reproducibility should not be confused with other terms describing the
ability to replicate the results in science, such as replicability and
repeatability ({cite}`plesser_reproducibility_2018`]). *Replicability* defined in a way consistent with our understanding of reproducibility is the
ability of an independent researcher to produce results that are
consistent with the conclusions of the original work, using new data or
different the experimental setup. The term *repeatability* appears in
some references, e.g. {cite}`ACMv1.1` that uses a notion of reproducibility
inconsistent with our definition, but should be considered to describe
an ability of a researcher to repeat his/her own experimental procedures
using same experimental setup and data, while achieving reasonably
repeatable results that support the same conclusions.

In order to compare these reproducibility-related terms, the main
conceptual dimensions need to be identified. Based on the analysis of
the literature, the following dimensions can be distinguished: (i)
availability of the components originally deployed in experimental
workflows (i.e., data, code and analysis as considered by
{cite}`pineau_et_al_2020`; {cite}`heil_et_al_2021`; {cite}`gundersen_kjensmo_2018`); (ii)
teams involved in the experimentation (i.e., whether or not the
experiments was conducted by the same group who is running the
reproducibility validation); (iii) reasons because the experiment or
part of it is re-conducted (i.e., validating the repeatability of the
experiment or as suggested by {cite}`Gundersen_2021` corroborating the
scientific hypothesis and theory the experiment aims to support. With
respect to these conceptual dimensions, the reproducibility-related
terms used in the literature can be clustered in the following way:

-   Most of the literature (including {cite}`pineau_et_al_2020`; {cite}`Gundersen_2021`; {cite}`NAS_2019`]) refers to reproducibility as the
    attempt to replicate experiment as much as possible as the original
    one, that is by using original data, code and analysis when
    available. Computational reproducibility, method reproducibility,
    direct replication and recomputation are used in lieu of
    reproducibility respectively by {cite}`heil_et_al_2021`,
    {cite}`goodman_et_al_2016`, {cite}`guttinger_2020`, {cite}`gent_Kotthoff_2014` and
    {cite}`stodden_2011`. {cite}`Gundersen_2021` distinguishes the notion of
    reproducibility from corroborating the scientific hypotheses or
    theory to ground which the experiment is designed for.

-   The term replicability is highlighted by
    {cite}`Claerbout1992`, {cite}`Lynnerup_et_al_2020`, {cite}`NAS_2019`, {cite}`pineau_et_al_2020`, where an independent team can obtain the same result using the data, which could be slightly different, and methods which they develop completely independently or change slightly. Furthermore {cite}`Lynnerup_et_al_2020`; {cite}`pineau_et_al_2020` use another name --
    robust -- for carrying out the experiments with the same data and
    some changes in an analysis or code implementations.

-   Some works such as {cite}`ACMv1.1` {cite}`Lynnerup_et_al_2020`; {cite}`JCGM_2012`; {cite}`Gundersen_2021` uses repeatability to indicate a weaker level of reproducibility where the replication of the experiment is achieved by the same team that provided the original experiments.

In the context of the above literature review, it is also worth
clarifying the discussion of what is reproduced as a result of the above
activities and how to understand the term result. In the case of AI
works, {cite}`Gundersen_2021` distinguishes between different possible
results to reproduce:

-   Outcome -- the result of applying the model implementation for
    selected data (e.g., predictions - labels for test examples)

-   Analysis -- calculated measures or other indicators (e.g. prediction
    accuracy values)

-   Interpretation -- more general conclusions from the experiments.
    According to Gunderesn the last point is the most important in
    reproducibility, because in the scientific method certain hypotheses
    are tested or certain beliefs are confirmed.

Similar importance of refining the levels of reproducibility has the
division proposed in {cite}`goodman_et_al_2016`:

-   Reproducibility of methods: the ability to implement, as exactly as
    possible, the experimental and computational procedures, with the
    same data and tools, to obtain the same results

-   Reproducibility of results: the production of corroborating results
    in a new study, having used the same experimental methods

-   Reproducibility of inference: the drawing of qualitatively similar
    conclusions from either an independent replication of a study or a
    reanalysis of the original study

The general definitions should be however made more specific whenever we
apply it to contemporary artificial intelligence research, and to the
sub-field of machine learning in particular. The reasons are grounded in
the high complication of the modern software processing pipelines, that
often depend on third-party software (frameworks, libraries), use an
extended set of metaparameters that are crucial to arrive at the correct
results, and require modern hardware (e.g. recent GPU cards) with it's
specific architecture and drivers. These features of AI research and
applications make this field different from the general science, where
reproducibility refers primarily to the careful documentation of the
experimental procedure.

In AI systems, the main components of the experimental setup are
software and data. The software plays the role of our experimental
setup. Although depending on the specific context, hardware components
may be included as well (e.g. in computer vision, robotics), most of the
AI-related research is conducted on pre-recorded datasets, so we can
limit our scope to the software. The other dimension is data. Together,
software and data define the conceptual dimensions of the space on which
the defined terms are spanned in AI. However, as we noticed earlier, AI
is a very broad field, with a number of distinctive sub-fields that have
specific requirements when it comes to defining the exact elements of
software, and sometimes have specific requirements as to the data, such
as elimination of biases or privacy issues. This motivates the
introduction of guidelines or "best practices" for reproducibility, that
often also include terms that define the degree to which the postulate
of full reproducibility is met, usually in relation to the amount of
code, technical details and data that the author shares with readers.

## Guidelines

Definitions of the different reproducibility-related terms are often
accompanied by badges and guidelines helping people in making the
definitions operational.

-   Some definitions differentiate the notion of reproducibility
    according to the kind of resource shared. For example
    {cite}`heil_et_al_2021` focus on *computational reproducibility* with
    **bronze, silver, gold** standards. {cite}`gundersen_kjensmo_2018` and
    {cite}`Gundersen_2021` propose different increasing levels *R1, R2, R3, R4*
    depending on whether experiment descriptions, codes, data and
    experiment are stored. @ACMv1.1 recommends that three separate
    badges related to artefact review be associated with research
    articles in ACM publications: Artifacts Evaluated, Artifacts
    Available and Results Validated.

-   Guidelines ease the description of experiments. For example,
    {cite}`pineau_et_al_2020` provides a special Machine learning
    reproducibility checklist; datasheets {cite}`gebru_datasheets_2020`,
    model cards {cite}`mitchell_modelcards_2019` and factsheets
    {cite}`arnold_factsheets_2019` provides templates for describing datasets
    and the AI models deployed increasing the transparency and
    accountability of experimentations and operational intelligent
    systems.

Below a few of the above guidelines are precised. Following
{cite}`heil_et_al_2021`'s proposal, the three degrees of the reproducibility
standards for ML are based on availability of data, model, and code, as
well as other analyses or programming dependencies. For instance, in the
bronze standards (the minimal requirements for reproducibility) the
authors should make the data, model and its source code publicly
available for downloading. The silver standard extends it by
additionally providing: dependencies of the analysis (in a form to be
installed in a single command), recording key details of the analysis
and used software requirements. Furthermore, all elements in the
analysis should be documented to be set deterministic. Within the gold
standard the authors should also prepare this analysis reproducible with
a single command - which is the most demanding with respect to full
automatization of the reproducibility process.

{cite}`pineau_et_al_2020` specify the necessary elements to be documented and
made public with respect to the following categories: model and
algorithm, theoretical claims, datasets used in experiments, shared code
including dependencies specifications, all reported experimental results
(with all details for the experimental setup, hyper-parameters, training
details, definitions of evaluation measures, and description of the
computing infrastructure used). {cite}`Lynnerup_et_al_2020` provide similar
recommendations for ML in robotics, by focusing on the reproducibility
of computation experiments on real robots. They stress the role of
managing properly the software dependencies, distinguishing between
experimental code and library code, and documenting the measurement
metrics, which is essential for reinforcement learning.

Datasheets by {cite}`gebru_datasheets_2020` specify how to document the
motivation, composition, collection process, recommended uses for data
deployed in the systems and experiments; model cards by
{cite}`mitchell_modelcards_2019` ease the description of model's intended use
cases limiting their usage in contexts for which they are not well
suited; factsheets {cite}`arnold_factsheets_2019` provide a template for
describing the purpose, performance, safety, security, and provenance
information to be completed by AI service providers for examination by
consumers.

## Software frameworks supporting reproducibility 

Lately, a paradigm based on tailoring the DevOps approach to AI and ML
is emerging as a practical tool for ensuring reproducibility. This
paradigm makes use of frameworks for Machine Learning Model
Operationalization Management (MLOps), which streamline the whole
development lifecycle of AI and ML models. MLOps enables developers and
auditors to keep track of and inspect the various choices done and the
artefacts produced in the different phases of AI and ML design and
development (i.e., data gathering, data analysis, data
transformation/preparation, model training and development, model
validation, and model serving). {cite}`Ruf_2021` analyze some of the
available open tools for MLOps. This allows for maintaining a
comprehensive documentation that is at the basis of model
reproducibility.

## Bibliography

```{bibliography}
:style: unsrt
:filter: docname in docnames
```

---

This entry was written by Riccardo Albertoni, Sara Colantonio, Piotr Skrzypczyński, and Jerzy Stefanowski.
